Procedures and Calls
Procedures, also called functions or subroutines, are reusable blocks of code that perform specific tasks. In x86 assembly, a procedure is simply a labeled section of code that can be called from multiple places using the CALL instruction and exited using RET. They help organize programs into logical sections and reduce code duplication.

Defining a Procedure
A procedure starts with a label and ends with a RET instruction.
Labels mark the entry point of the procedure, and RET tells the CPU to return to the instruction that follows the original call.

Example:

my_function:
    mov eax, 5
    add eax, 10
    ret

This defines a small procedure that sets EAX to 15 and returns control to the caller.

Calling a Procedure
The CALL instruction transfers control to a procedure while automatically saving the return address (the next instruction after the call) on the stack.

Example:

call my_function
mov ebx, eax

Here’s what happens step by step:

The CPU pushes the address of the next instruction (mov ebx, eax) onto the stack.

It jumps to the label my_function.

The procedure executes its instructions.

RET pops the saved return address from the stack and resumes execution at mov ebx, eax.

Example with Multiple Procedures
add_numbers:
    add eax, ebx
    ret

main:
    mov eax, 4
    mov ebx, 6
    call add_numbers     ; EAX = EAX + EBX
    call print_result
    jmp done

print_result:
    ; pretend to print the value in EAX
    ret

done:
    ; program end

In this example:

main sets up data and calls add_numbers to perform addition.

After the call returns, it calls another procedure, print_result.

Control then moves to the done label, which marks the end of the program.

Each CALL creates a new return address, allowing multiple nested calls without confusion.

Returning from a Procedure
The RET instruction returns control to the address that was saved when CALL was executed.
It pops the return address off the stack and jumps to it automatically.

Example:

ret

This is always the final instruction in a procedure. Without it, the CPU would continue executing into whatever code follows, leading to undefined behavior.

Summary
A procedure is a labeled section of code that performs a task.

CALL saves the next instruction’s address and jumps to the procedure.

RET returns to that saved address.

Procedures help make assembly code modular, organized, and easier to reuse.