Conditional Statements
Conditional statements in assembly control the flow of execution based on comparisons. In high-level languages, these correspond to constructs like if, else, and while. In x86 assembly, they are implemented using comparison instructions followed by conditional jumps such as JG, JL, and JE.

Signedness Overview
When performing comparisons, the CPU needs to know whether to treat numbers as signed (positive and negative) or unsigned (only positive).
The interpretation affects how jump instructions behave because different flags are checked depending on the type of comparison.

Signed values use the most significant bit (MSB) as the sign bit.

0x00000005 → +5

0xFFFFFFFB → -5

Unsigned values treat all bits as part of the magnitude.

0xFFFFFFFB → 4,294,967,291
In C terms:

signed int a = -5;
unsigned int b = 4294967291;

These two values are stored the same way in memory, but how you interpret them determines the jump condition you use.

CMP – The Comparison Instruction
Before a conditional jump, a comparison must be made using the CMP instruction.

Syntax:

cmp destination, source

Example:

cmp eax, ebx     ; Subtracts EBX from EAX internally and sets flags

CMP does not store a result. It sets flags in the CPU (Zero Flag, Sign Flag, Overflow Flag, etc.) that conditional jumps use to decide whether to branch.

JE – Jump if Equal
JE (Jump if Equal) transfers control if the two operands compared by CMP are equal.
It checks the Zero Flag (ZF), which is set when subtraction produces zero.

Example:

cmp eax, ebx
je equal_label

If EAX == EBX, execution jumps to equal_label.
If not, execution continues normally.

JG – Jump if Greater (Signed)
JG (Jump if Greater) checks whether the first operand is greater than the second, treating both as signed integers.
It jumps if the Zero Flag (ZF) is clear and the Sign Flag (SF) equals the Overflow Flag (OF).

Example:

cmp eax, ebx
jg greater_label

If EAX > EBX (signed comparison), control jumps to greater_label.

JL – Jump if Less (Signed)
JL (Jump if Less) checks whether the first operand is less than the second, treating both as signed.
It jumps if the Sign Flag (SF) and Overflow Flag (OF) are not equal.

Example:

cmp eax, ebx
jl less_label

If EAX < EBX (signed comparison), control jumps to less_label.

Example
cmp eax, ebx      ; Compare EAX and EBX
je  equal_case    ; Jump if EAX == EBX
jg  greater_case  ; Jump if EAX > EBX (signed)
jl  less_case     ; Jump if EAX < EBX (signed)

This mirrors the logic of:

if (a == b)
    equal_case();
else if (a > b)
    greater_case();
else
    less_case();

Summary
Signedness determines how comparisons interpret the most significant bit.

CMP sets flags based on subtraction results.

JE jumps when operands are equal.

JG jumps when the first operand is greater (signed).

JL jumps when the first operand is less (signed).