Data movement is one of the most common operations in assembly. The CPU spends a large portion of time transferring data between registers, memory, and the stack.

Three key instructions handle this at the most basic level: MOV, PUSH, and POP.

MOV – Move Data
The MOV instruction copies data from one location to another. It does not modify the source, only the destination.

Syntax:

mov destination, source

Examples:

mov eax, 5        ; Move the value 5 into the EAX register
mov ebx, eax      ; Copy the contents of EAX into EBX

MOV is fundamental. Nearly every instruction sequence involves it. It can move data between registers, between registers and memory, or from immediate values to registers.
However, it cannot move directly from one memory address to another; at least one operand must be a register or an immediate value.

PUSH – Store Data on the Stack
The PUSH instruction saves a value to the stack.
It decreases the ESP register (the stack pointer) and writes the value at the new stack address.

Syntax:

push source

Examples:

push eax      ; Push the value in EAX onto the stack
push 0x10     ; Push the constant 0x10 onto the stack

PUSH is often used to store registers before a function call or to pass arguments to a function. Each push reserves 4 bytes on the stack in 32-bit mode.

POP – Retrieve Data from the Stack
The POP instruction removes a value from the stack and stores it into a register or memory.
It reads the value at the address pointed to by ESP, then increases ESP by 4.

Syntax:

pop destination

Examples:

pop eax       ; Pop the top stack value into EAX
pop ebx       ; Pop the next value into EBX

POP is commonly used after a function returns or after saving/restoring register states.

Example Sequence
mov eax, 10     ; Store 10 in EAX
push eax        ; Save EAX on the stack
mov eax, 20     ; Overwrite EAX with 20
pop ebx         ; Restore the old value (10) from the stack into EBX

After this code:

EAX contains 20

EBX contains the previous value 10

Summary
MOV transfers data between registers, memory, and immediate values.

PUSH saves a value onto the stack and decreases ESP.

POP restores a value from the stack and increases ESP.

Together, these instructions control how data moves through the CPU and the stack, forming the foundation of most x86 assembly operations.